---
layout: post
title: Reclaiming disk space from MacPorts
category: macports
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

<a href="#disqus_thread">View Comments</a>

p(meta). 26 May 2009 - São Paulo, SP - Brazil

I use and like MacPorts for some software that have a too cumbersome/bugged compilation process. Many people use it extensively and others just dislike and ignore it.

A frequent complain about MacPorts is that it takes too much disk space (since it installs its own libraries instead of using the system ones). This is a valid concern and there's a way to mitigate it. MacPorts allows you to clear files used to build a port, namely work files, distribution files and archives. To remove all of them from all installed ports, execute the following command:

<notextile>
<code>
sudo port clean --all all
</code>
</notextile>

This will clean all kinds of file for all ports. The syntax is simple. Let's say you want to clear only work files from the port icu:

<notextile>
<code>
sudo port clean --work icu
</code>
</notextile>

More information can be obtained on the port command man files.

Another thing you can do to reclaim some disk space is uninstall inactive ports:

<notextile>
<code>
sudo port uninstall inactive
</code>
</notextile>

These two commands worked very well for me, managing to reduce MacPorts directory (/opt/local/var/macports) size from 1.3 Gb to 730 Mb.

*Read more*:

    "Speeding up port install":http://spicycode.com/2009/05/17/sudo-port-install-turbo.html <br/>
    "Keeping things clean when using MacPorts":http://spicycode.com/2009/02/23/cleaning-up-with-macports.html